---
layout: post
title:  "Of the Human and the Universal"
date:   2023-07-04 14:00:00 -0800
categories: Philosophy Metaphysics
---

### Foreward - The Universal and the Human

*"A border marks an inside and an outside."* - Jean Luc Nancy

The goal of this piece is simple, identify a set of metaphysically consistent Truths that inform how humans are to act in the Universe. While this appears a noble pursuit, any student of metaphysics will quickly sense the tension and perhaps impossibility of such a task. For all that metaphysics offers, it generally remains silent on the subject of human behavior. With this acknowledgment of likely failure in mind, we set out nonetheless. 

When reasoning about metaphysics and philosophy one often finds themselves nevigating between two disparate modalities, the Universal and the human. While these two modalities are inherently linked, the *"hard"* problem of perception makes it nigh impossible to bridge between these foreign territories.[^1] The Universal appears as a precise and ordered territory, governed by a minimal set of clear and rigorous laws. A vast and empty space that, like a blank canvas, has a rough form and dimension that we can make out, but whose content is empty and indiscernable to us. In contrast, the human appears as a messy tapestry of chaos, conflict, color, and complication. The territory of the human is filled with words, wisdom, emotion, perceived phenomenon, and incompleteness. It is a space colored by the totality of human history, and any clarity or order is a fleeting mirage in the face of language, morality, community, politics, and the detritus of evolution.[^2] An excess of energy where uncertainly increases linearly with examination, and any search for objective truths is met with confusion and disappointment. 

The territory of the human fits somewhere inside the vast expanse of the Universal, and this piece focuses its attention on the border between these two foreign lands, the place where the rigor and clarity of the Universal meets the chaos and noise of the human. It is at this boundary where we may attempt to cut through the confusion and circuity of the human towards a clarity that we can cite as *Universally* consistent, a clarity that we may carry with us through the disorienting territory of the human. We cannot map nor know the territory of the Universal, but by mapping the border between the Universal and the human we may identify the total domain space that is the human. While this does not allow us to make statements about where in that domain space we should fall, we may use it to make metaphysically correct statements about the properties of the human domain and inform where in the domain space we place ourselves. Additionally, this map leaves us with a tool for cutting the noise and chaos of the human down to a minimal set of propositions in which we may believe. A map of what is certain. The rest is noise.

This piece builds upon the framework of [*A Map of the Universe*](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4077540) (Berger & Rayl 2022), taking the findings of that paper as a guide for metaphysical correctness. This piece does not make any argument and does not try to prove itself. I do not hope to convince anyone of anything, I merely wish to think through the implications of what has already been posited in the *Map* and clarify things for myself and those who have the same insights as me. For rigorous proofs of any of the statements made below, one may refer to the full text of *A Map of the Universe*. 

With that, we set off to map the boundary between the human and the Universal.

### The Counterfactual is Nothingness

Perception of the Universe is all that there is. The alternative to this is nothingness: a state of not perceiving all that there is. Thus if one finds the states presented by the Universe preferable to nothingness, than one must live in profound gratitude. Given that this is the revealed preference of all who are living, gratitude is an aesthetic which we can claim to be metaphysically consistent. Pray often and pray forcefully, for we are lucky that there exists anything at all.

### On the Meaning of the Universe

At the Universal level (Reality), there is no meaning, only the Universe. As an observer of the Universe, one cannot "understand" (perceive) the Universe without necessarily compressing it via language. Language introduces inaccuracies and negates any chance of knowing the meaning of the Universe. We necessarily cannot know the meaning of Universe, for the meaning is the totality which we cannot contain. The negation of our ability to ever find inherent meaning in the Universe has grand implications. It is first and foremost an acceptance of the futility of the human project. We will never be able to accomplish that which our existence demands from us: understand the Universe. And no matter the degree of technological or intellectual advance, the pursuit of inherent meaning will be a chase towards an unattainable limit. From theory we are able to know that our ability to know the Universal will decrease asymptotically as we approach the limit of the Universal. Given this boundary condition we may know that any claims of inherent meaning are false and any pursuit of inherent meaning will necessarily fail. Usually theory can take us only so far, but in this case it takes to the end and allows us to set a firm limit. So where does this leave us? The necessary boundary between the human and the Universal leaves us with the space of the human in which to scrap for meaning. On a human level, meaning is simply a function of the Global Aesthetics (preferred perceptive states) chosen by a given human and is necessarily different for each person. With this in mind, one should think very hard about their Global Aesthetics and pursue that which is meaningful with respect to their Global Aesthetics. Equally, one should understand that this meaning is not inherent nor Universal, and thus should not lose sleep wondering if they are correct nor take offence at competing views of meaning. 

You may find pockets of meaning and purpose in the territory of the human, but remember these pockets of meaning are nothing more than a constructed game, and that this game that you play is not moving towards anything absolute. And that the collective force or humanity, or more broadly intelligence, wanders aimlessly with respect to the ultimate goal of attaining inherent meaning. This should not change how you act day to day, but it should color how you comport yourselves towards this action.

### Comportment Towards Determinism

"What's happened, happened, which is an expression of faith in the mechanics of the Universe."

The Universe is discrete and finite, thus it is necessarily deterministic. Given that the domain of the human is situated within the domain of the Universal, it is also necessarily deterministic. Having established this Reality, how should a human comport themselves towards determinism? As is commonly the case with metaphysics, theory can only take us so far. Following the pattern of many of the takeaways in this piece, there are a set of higher level Truths about the Universe such as its deterministic nature, but within the domain space defined by these Truths humans are left with no guidance other than to act as we see fit. At the extreme, one may choose to internalize that the Universe is deterministic and by logical extension enjoy the benefits of feeling no stress or strife. However, we are by default capable of creating the illusion of free will through our inability to perfectly model the Universe. If one chooses to believe in free will, then one should optimize over the activities that produce the illusion of free will and experience the freedom and empowerment that the illusion of free will offers[^2]. And with all things, one's choice of how much to lean into determinism or the illusion of free will should be a function of their Global Aesthetics.[^3] Many will end up somewhere between these two extremes, battling between our ability to generate illusions of free will and the rational mind telling us that our lives must surely be deterministic. This internal discontinuity highlights an often present conflict between the Universal and the human. One may know and believe that the Universe is deterministic, yet in the realm of the human it is nigh impossible to fully internalize this fact into our thought and action as it is incommensurate with our biological disposition. Epochs of evolution has wired us with truths that are not metaphysically correct, causing us to forget or turn away from Truths we may deduce from precise, logical consideration of the Universe. In examining the boundary between the human and the Universal, we often find that the laws of the Universal clash with what we have inherited from the territory of the human. The degree to which we rebel against the human in pursuit of clarity is left to the user, though I imagine most readers of this piece will find it a battle worth fighting.

### The Implications of Language and Compression

“From the beginning, the Universe signified the totality of what humankind can expect to know about it. What people call the progress of the human mind and, in any case, the progress of scientific knowledge, could only have been and can only ever be constituted out of processes of correcting and recutting of patterns, regrouping, defining relationships of belonging and discovering new resources, inside a totality which is closed.” - Giorgio Agamben, *Taste*

Perception of the Universe necessarily requires compression, and language is the tool that humans use to achieve compression. Compression distorts the true Reality of the Universe, languages form axioms, and only within the axioms of a given language may statements be judged as True or False. Having established these weighty statements, one may discuss the implications of language on human existence.

Language is compression, and as a result of compression humans cannot know objective truths. One implication of this is that humans can only hope to achieve slightly "better" (or perhaps just different) approximations of Reality over time. Scientific advancement may produce more accurate languages for describing the Universe and its constituent parts, but these languages will always remain inaccurate to some degree. In this sense there is no progress, only more "coherent" patterning, and knowledge is an aesthetic judgment[^5]. Science is the religion of the present, and in the future it will be supplanted by another language. Advancements in knowledge are beautiful in that they represent novel, more accurate models of the patterns that the Universe produces, however, these advancements in knowledge do not strive towards a finality and their value is merely aesthetic. An elegant, but inaccurate way to pattern the Universe. Despite knowledge being subordinated to the realm of aesthetics, it remains a worthy pursuit as at the end of the day aesthetics is all that we have.

The omnipresence of language and compression in the territory of the human also negates the possibility of objective truths. With this topples any hierarchies, and the destruction of such hierarchies has radical implications for human comportment towards the philosophical and ethical. To begin, any statement of aesthetic superiority is rendered unfounded[^5]. Without claim to aesthetic superiority, any justification for imposing a normative belief structure upon anyone else is lost. If we are to remain metaphysically consistent, this informs a "libertas" system of political and ethical beliefs by which one's will should not be imparted upon another[^6]. This is not to say that one should abstain from all normative beliefs and preferences. To the contrary, one is called to craft a rigorous set of beliefs and tastes that is a thoughtful reflection of one's Global Aesthetics. However, remain aware that this is all it is, a reflection of some environmental, social, cultural matrix in which one is arbitrarily inculcated, and to assert an aesthetic hierarchy and impose this hierarchy upon another would be metaphysically unfounded. This boundary between the Universal and the human is one of the rare places where we may draw an elegant, direct connection between metaphysical Truth and how we should act if we wish to live a metaphysically consistent life.

The limits of language also inform how we should tune our comportment to self and others. Trapping within the shortcomings of language, one will not be able to accurately capture their own internal states let alone share them with others in a manner that is anything other than a gross approximation. Considering this, the most accurate expression we can hope for is to act, but not speak. To state ones preferences, but not to explain them. Through acting in accordance with one's Global Aesthetics a closer approximation of true internal states may be revealed. But remember that this is all that it is, an approximation of the Truth. Even those parts of the Universe with which we are most familiar, ourselves, are experienced via language and thus cannot be known.

And yes, this entire section (and piece for that matter) is self-referentially ironic[^7].

### Words in Equilibrium

“We could not reach the final object of knowledge without the dissolution of knowledge, which aims to reduce its object to the condition of subordinated and managed things. The ultimate problem of knowledge is the same as that of consumption. No one can both know and not be destroyed; no one can both consume wealth and increase it.” - Georges Bataille

The takeaways posited above paint a dim picture of the territory of the human and our ability to make meaningful statements about the Universe. Humans cannot know objective truths, language is necessarily inaccurate, and hierarchies of aesthetics and action are unfounded. Further contributing to these harsh Realities is the Void, the inherent ability of humans to iteratively negate any truth until the set of all possible truths has been destroyed[^8]. Putting together the flaws of language with teh ability to negate any conclusion and iterating through all combinations of words and possible propositions we arrive at the equilibrium where the relationship of humans to knowledge is revealed:

In the equilibrium, all words go to zero.
In the equilibrium, all knowledge goes to zero.

Nothing that is Meaningful may be said. Nothing that is True may be known. This Reality is not an excuse to do nothing, but rather a token to call on as one performs actions in the Universe. It is not a disappointing fact of life, but rather a liberating one. In a paradoxical manner, the understanding that knowledge goes to zero liberates one from the burden of knowledge. Bataille accurately posited that one cannot both know and not be destroyed. The solution to this paradox is to destroy knowledge, then via the clever trick of knowning that nothing may be known one both knows and is not destroyed. In this sense, knowledge is a local maxima. One must undergo the painful process of acquiring knowledge in order to arrive at a place where it may be destroyed. One may then continues with only a token from this past journey, the knowledge that knowledge goes to zero. In the tradition of Wittgenstein, of which all my work is but a poor and less-elegant replication, "My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out through them, on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw away the ladder, after he has climbed up on it.) He must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world rightly. Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.” Knowledge is adversarial, and one must surmount it. This finding informs important takeaways about how one should comport themselves to words and knowledge.

Words are not functional objects. Words are aesthetic objects.
Knowledge is not functional, it is merely aesthetic.

Given these Truths, it is important that words and knowledge are approached with an understanding of what these objects are. They are aesthetic objects, and should be cherished and possessed as such. When words, knowledge, and all the rest goes to zero, what remains is the beauty and form of these objects, not their meaning. When it comes to words, do not weight them as serious metaphysical objects that carry meaning. When it comes to knowledge do not try to understand, just feel, for the aesthetic feeling of knowledge is all that is really there. While these objects may take on great meaning and beauty in the territory of the human, they should be stripped of all meaning when tarrying in the realm of the Universal. Where one tries to mingle the profound and the banal, the disappointed man speaks. And as we know, one truly cannot speak. 

### The Universe Individuated

As entities that model signals generated by the Universe, our reality is entirely a function of our own modeling processes. As it pertains to our perception, the Universe may be thought of as the static object and our perception of the world as what is in flux. While this particular boundary between the Universal and the human is dictated to some degree by certain physical and biological constraints, we are left with a large degree of *autonomy* to perceive Reality in a manner of our choosing. It naturally follows that we ought to utilize this *autonomy* to perceive reality in a manner that is commensurate with our preferences and Global Aesthetics, and it is thus the duty of the individual to adopt practices that shift perceived reality in line with their Global Aesthetics. The shape of this practice is left to the individual, but it may take the form of a referent, a reminder, a specific environment, a meditation, or any other trigger that alters perception. In altering how we perceive the Universe, we may asymmetrically slant the deck in our favor. This stacking of the deck is an almost necessary counterbalance to the fact that from inception the Universe is slanted against us. We may never know Truth nor find inherent meaning, and any thorough reasoning will only lead to metaphysical disappointment and darkness. In this sense the Universe deals an unwinnable hand to anyone dares to seek out Truth, but in carefully observing the rules of the game Reality presents to us a trick by which one may if not win, at least stay in the game. As if with a wink, the Universe extends a lifeline to those who have thought through this problem, for examination of the Universal reveals both its cruel nature but also how we may exploit its rules to play an unwinnable game. Optimism always, for it is the only antidote. 

### Implications of an Inconsistent Self

"I am not the same person that I was yesterday."

The Self is not a concrete, tangible, or consistent object. It is instead a set of models representing the behavior of an agent, in short, a compressed representation of how an agent will model a given environment.[^10] The Self is not a sacred object belonging to an individual, nor is it stable over time. A representation of Self at time *t* is necessarily different from the representation at time *t+1* as one forgets what they believe, what they have accomplished, and what they represent. One day you awake a king, the next a peasant. Humans have evolved to maintain a fairly consistent Self as a necessary feature for navigating the local environment (one can imagine that social organization, labor, and survival would be quite difficult if we embodied different representations of Self each day). However, this consistent thread of Self that we generally take as given is a function of our inability to model, and if we could perfectly model the Universe we would realize that the Self is no more than an unstable representation that is inconsistent between time periods. The ephemeral nature of Self gives us a strong boundary from which we can draw conclusions about the nature of the human condition. Though these conclusions are upsetting to that which we often hold in the highest regard, the Self, they also liberate us from the demanding need to maintain a representation and the inevitable pain of this representation crumbling. Striving for a truly concrete and consistent Self eventually results in despair and anguish as the Self is de facto inconsistent, and attempts to cling onto a sacred sense of self are akin to swimming against the tides of Reality. In short, do not take your *self* seriously. In accepting this Reality and overcoming the Self, one unlocks the ability to choose what aspects of Self they identify with. Here is where the Self, like all findings in this piece, connects back to Global Aesthetics. In overcoming the Self we are free to form a representation of Self that is commensurate with what we are striving to achieve, our Global Aesthetics. The Self is a constructed tool, and it is useful if not altogether necessary for accomplishing many of the objective historically favored by humans: achieving long-term goals, maintaining inter-human relationships, and long-term planning based on a set of consistent tastes. If these objectives fall within one's Global Aesthetics, then one should form a representation of Self that facilitates the realization of these Global Aesthetics and adopt the practices or mantras necessary to maintain this constructed Self. But remember that this is all that it is, a representation that has been constructed to achieve an end. As is the case with knowledge, one must undergo the process of understanding and destroying the Self in order to overcome it and continue forward with the understanding that the Self is nothing more than a constructued representation.

### On Aesthetics, Clarity, and Beauty

In examining the the boundary between the human the Universal one consistently finds that Reality defines a set of limits that constrain the territory of the human, but Reality does not prescribe normative recommendations and within these limits one is left to pursue that which is commensurate with their Global Aesthetics. The question then naturally arises of how we should think about these aesthetics. 

To begin, one may object to the claim that the Universe remains silent on the subject of aesthetics, citing Platonic forms and the existence of works of art, social modes, and beauty that has transcended culture and time. While the persistance of certain aesthetics may be easily reconciled as a phenomena that exists within the space of the human and is ultimately a function of nature and nurture. Within the social, economic, and biological forces that give rise aesthetics, there are a set of common threads foisted upon us by the epistemes of the era, epistemes that have been proven time and time again to be arbitrary[^12]. The Universe remains silent on aesthetics, but the history of humanity does not. This leaves us in an unsatisfactory place, as our search for metaphysically consistent aesthetics goes unanswered. Once again, the best we can do is to give a definition of aesthetics and define the boundaries in which we may operate. 

Aesthetics is the excessive signifier. A set of Parts that cannot be captured by any given language or model without a large degree of slippage. A signified that cannot be compressed to a direct mapping with a signified, yet exists in an uncompressed state in the mind of the operator. It is precisely in this slippage, in the uncompressed nature of an entity that aesthetics are found. Aesthetics exist, but they cannot be easily captured in language, and it is precisely this excess, this uncompressable complexity that is beautiful. Natural complexity, social complexity, perceptive complexity. All around us, all the time. That which we cannot compress and coalate via language, that which cuts closest to the Totality, closest to the Universe, that is beautiful. Language compresses and distorts the Universal. That which resists this process, that which is difficult to capture via language, that which is closest to the Universal is beautiful.

Out of this definition falls important implications. The inability for aesthetics to be captured and compressed means that aesthetics may only be approached via intuition, a set of models that may not be easily compressed. For this reason aesthetics cannot be discussed, only shown. Destined for failure is the human who attempts to explain their Global Aesthetics for the only authentic representation of aesthetics comes through action. Do not speak, act. This act is the representation of Beauty, in and of itself. Beauty is an aesthetic that is fully pronounced, fully realized. An act that maximizes the excessive signifier with respect to a given aesthetic and actualizes this excessive signifier upon the substrate of Reality. In this sense, the pursuit of Beauty is precisely the act of aligning Reality with a Global Aesthetic. Thus follows that the goal of life is to achieve the beautiful, to strive to achieve one's Global Aesthetics. And given the individuated nature of the Universe, achieving this Beauty is all that matters.

Aesthetics is the only object, Beauty the only pursuit.

If Beauty is a pursuit, an act of moving in a specific direction, the question remains of what this direction should be. While no normative direction can be prescribed, we can assert that this direction ought to be well-defined. This is Clarity. A well-defined understanding of one's Global Aesthetics, a certainty about the direction in which one should move in the pursuit of Beauty. While advice on how to achieve Clarity is beyond the scope of this work, within the framework developed in this piece we can assert the importance of Clarity and its role in actualizing Beauty.

### How to Act in a Metaphysically Silent Universe

"The mystery of life isn't a problem to solve, but a reality to experience. A process that cannot be understood by stopping it. We must move with the flow of the process. We must join it." - Frank Herbert

Any call to the Universal is met with silence as its meaning is nothing more than that which it is, and that which it is cannot be captured by anything other than the Universe itself. We are left in a metaphysically silent Universe in which any calls for meaning go unanswered and the only object we have to cling to is an unfounded set of Global Aesthetics. While our Global Aesthetics appear a shaky lifeboat amid a sweeping sea of tumult, it is all that we have to cling to, and in a metaphysically precarious Universe the best that we can do is cling on tightly.

Striving towards our Global Aesthetics is how we are to act in a metaphysically silent Universe. Our Global Aesthetics provides a modus operandi, a set of morals, tastes, objectives, and future states around which we may construct meaning, purpose, and stability. At the end of the day Global Aesthetics is all that we have, and we must approach and pursue it with the utmost care and rigor. One must meditate on their Global Aesthetics in order to achieve Clarity. With Clarity in hand, one may then pursue Beauty, a dogged pursuit of Global Aesthetics. This is the call of the human. Not ordained by the Universe, for the Universe is silent, but ordained as the only pursuit that is logically commensurate with the Universe. The Universal does not tell us what to pursue, it only offers pursuit as an alternative to despair and drowning. We cannot know if it is the correct pursuit, only that it is the only pursuit. And it is with this minor hint that we must run. We must doggedly pursue our Global Aesthetics and actualize the perceptive states that we wish to experience. We must doggedly pursue beauty, forming the excessive signifier that keeps us afloat. The full instantiation of life is this pursuit of beauty, the chasing of our aesthetics with maximum rigor. It is not what we do, it is that we do, for that pursuit is the only metaphysically commensurate action that we may impart upon the Universe.

Doggedly press forward, for in a Universe devoid of nobility, some work of noble note may yet be done.

### A Ballerina's Leap

"He constantly makes the movements of infinity, but he does this with such correctness and assurance that he constantly gets the finite out of it, and there is not a second when one has a notion of anything else. It is supposed to be the most difficult task for a dancer to leap into a definite posture in such a way that there is not a second when he is grasping after the posture, but by the leap itself he stands fixed in that posture. Perhaps no dancer can do it - that is what this knight does." - Soren Kierkegaard 

The human story is fundamentally a tragic one. The Universe demands that we study and understand it, but we are not granted the faculties necessary to do so. We are called to lead meaningful lives, but the search for inherent meaning is but a fool's errand. We are drawn to true connection, but all words slip into nothing. However, like the structure and themes of a Shakespearian tragedy we may study and understand the rules of the game, the nature of our tragedy. While the die is cast and a tragic ending may not be avoided, we may change the way that we comport ourselves to this tragedy so as to resist its cruel nature. 

The territory of the human presents us with chaos and noise, and just as gravity drags us to Earth our biological disposition pulls us towards metaphysically inconsistent beliefs that only amplify the confusion and despair. However, if we are able to form and engrain a set of metaphysical Truths deep enough in our psyche, metaphysical Truths that may be readily referenced in the most adverse of situations, we may cut through and turn chaos and noise into complexity and beauty. A set of Truths understood deeply enough to hold conversation and see words as aesthetic objects. To pursue meaning whilst knowing what it actually is. To constantly remember that the alternative is nothingness. To understand how we are inconsistent and may think ourselves into anything, all whilst nimbly controlling what we think ourselves into. So much chaos. So much noise. But correctly imbued with the clarity of the Universal, so much complexity, so much beauty.

The critical human sets out to find the clarity of the Universal and is resigned to a split life, a dualistic existence in which one foot is firmly planted in the territory of the human and one foot is firmly planted in the territory of the Universal. This is a life of paradox, as the disparate rules of both territories pull the wary observer in conflicting directions. The territory of the human draws one towards wanting to write the perfect story and lead an optimized life, whilst simultaneously the Universe tells us that what we do does not matter, what we care about is arbitrary, and that existence is an aimless cause. The territory of the human fills us with emotion, conflict, and purpose while the Universal wrests this all away. A paradox between the the underlying Reality of the Universe and how one wishes to participate in it. This paradox reveals itself most clearly at the exact border where it is formed, the boundary between the human and Universal, and if anything this piece serves to reveal just that paradox. Those who have made it this far have certainly identified and grappled with this paradox before, and the ultimate question becomes how to deftly navigate it.

Kierkegaard proposed the metaphor of a ballerina's leap when describing the manner in which a knight of faith may tarry between the human and the realm of God. A movement so deft and agile that to an observer there appears no seperation between when the dancer was on the ground and in the air. In searching for a set of metaphysically consistent Truths  this piece proposes a set of findings for making just such a leap. A leap in which one is able to move with grace between the modalities of the human and the Universal whilst appearing to be in both states at the same time. A movement in which one seems to be in superposition, present in both the human and the Universal at the same time. The Universe presents us with a paradox in which the rules of the Universal conflict with the rules of the human. The only way to solve a paradox is with a superposition, to exist in both conflicting states at the same time. We will never be able to achieve this superposition fully, to fully live in both territories simultaneously. However, we may strive to deftly leap between the two so as to move as close to superposition as possible. This is precisely what this piece has set out to do. Provide the tools necessary for one to dance through life, living in harmony with both the human and the Universal. To leap to the Universal and back again without ever appearing to leave the ground, for to be a great human is to live in superposition between the human and the Universal. To be a great human is to gracefully live in paradox.

"Most people live dejectedly in wordly sorrow and joy; they are the ones who sit along the wall and do not join in the dance. The knights of infinity are dancers and possess elevation." - Soren Kierkegaard

### Afterword

Despite sacrificing scope in order to make strong claims that are metaphysically consistent, and despite appearing to be built on a rigorous metaphysical framework, this piece and the statements made within are but a rickety ladder placed upon a shaky scaffolding, and could very well all just represent another set of aesthetic judgments. Despite an intense desire to live in Universal clarity and hold oneself to the light of Truth, this work too is ultimately a ladder that must be climbed and then thrown away, for certainly anyone who has attended to these problems will be able to cast doubt on all that has been postulated here. So with this disclaimer of hubris we press on, feeling a little better about our actions than we did yesterday, but altogether not particularly good about anything at all.

### Footnotes

[^1]: One could make a compelling argument that it *is* impossible to bridge between these two territories, thus rendering this entire piece a fool's errand. I am open to this possibility.

[^2]: "No matter what you will do a wise man will come along and ..." - Zizek
or ...
[^2]: "I am generally opposed to wisdom." - Zizek

---

[^1]: Maps are tools of compression that contain knowledge about the territory. This piece is simply a map^2, a map of a map.

[^1]: For the search for metaphysical truths is performed both in *vain* and in *vanity*.


[^1]: This being a result of the fact that philosophy generally starts uses natural language and broadly defined concepts to get its point across (as opposed to using a language such as mathematics which is tightly scoped to the domain of concepts where you can prove all the statements that you make).

[^2]: Somewhat ironically, this equates to not modeling the world very well. To explicate this with a faulty anecdote, if you want to believe that anything is possible, simply do not model the constraints of the world.

[^3]: And any belief set somewhere between the extremes of determinism and maximal free will is also permitted, and perhaps recommended. 

[^4]: For a more comprehensive review of these sentences, one can consult the many great minds who have dedicated their careers and lives to the conundrum of language. To name just a few, see the work of Wittgenstein, de Saussure, Russell, Gödel, Lévi-Strauss, and Derrida.

[^5] Which is not to claim that there is no value to pursuit of more coherent patterning.

[^5]: If fully internalized this statement has truly radical implications and is a severe indictment of the history of humanity, but I will leave it to the reader to parse that out.

[^6]: By libertarian and laissez-faire I mean to use these signifiers in their pure and undiluted form, not their form that has been soaked in years of competing interests. The reader is left to fill in exactly what this political and ethical belief system should look like.

[^7]: Discussing language by using language.

[^8]: The Void is a concept that is phenomenologically intuitive but axiomatically difficult to define and prove. A full explanation and proof for the Void may be found in the Map.

[^9]: The equilibrium in this case the Void, the state of play after all possibilities have been iterated through. It is at this equilibrium that the value of all knowledge, wisdom, and words reveals itself to be zero.

[^10]: This representation is not limited to an agent's representation of itself, a different representation is contained by those who the agent interacts with, our representation of self is necessary different from how others represent us. One is a Self to the degree that this representation is maintained in a recognizable form across time, but given computational limits of the brain it is impossible to perfectly maintain this representation as an unchanging state.

[^12]: Surely the work of Foucoult and [... insert names here] should be enough to lay this to rest.


